```{eval-rst}
.. meta::
   :description: Release notes for Workshop v0.1.9, featuring minimal ZFS pool
                 size requirements, code completion, and improved shell sessions.
```

# Workshop v0.1.9 release notes

## 14 February 2025

These release notes cover new features and changes in Workshop v0.1.9.

## Requirements and Compatibility

Normally, Workshop relies on Snap and LXD in its operation:

- For installation details, see the
  [Tutorial](https://canonical-workshop.readthedocs-hosted.com/stable/tutorial/).
- For additional development requirements, see the [Contribution
  Guide](https://canonical-workshop.readthedocs-hosted.com/stable/contributing/).

## What’s New in Workshop v0.1.9

### Ensuring minimal workable ZFS pool size

This update improves how Workshop handles ZFS volumes. It ensures the storage
pool is at least 5GiB; otherwise, Workshop may run out of space in tests and
environments with less than ~14GiB of available space. In such cases, LXD
defaults to 20%, resulting in a pool size of around 2GiB for Workshop.

### Code completion for command arguments

Previously, code completion was only available for subcommands. This update adds
dynamic shell completion for arguments in all commands that can benefit from it.
Each completion is validated to ensure that when a suggestion is provided, the
user can press Enter and expect the command to succeed.

### Aligning shell/exec/run sessions and environment

This update improves UX consistency, ensuring that `shell`, `exec`, and `run`
sessions in Workshop use the correct user and group settings from the instance
and an environment based on a login shell.

For example:
- Commands that depend on instance-provided user details (e.g., groups, home
  directory) will now work as expected.
- Environment variables set by interfaces will always be present.

At a minimum, commands will now include:

```shell
sudo -u <uid> -g <gid> --preserve-env -- bash -l
```

### Doc and Code Coverage

- We now use an auto-generated documentation coverage map that can be run with a
  GitHub workflow or manually.
- A pre-commit configuration for `golangci-lint` was added for running local
  checks.

## Changelog

**Full Changelog**:
https://github.com/canonical/workshop/compare/v0.1.8...v0.1.9